# Executive Summary
* Talk about what the goal of this lab is !

In week 7 of Intro to IT for Computer Programmers the topics we are covering get increasingly more in depth of informational technology. Main topics (as seen as bold headers) include object oriented concepts, basic catgeories for data and structures query languages, and IT/computer ethics. In the object orientation concept we will be looking over the creation of class charts and the what details fit into them (features, actions, etc). Data in this weeks lab covers two main topics: relational data and big data- which will both be looked over in depth with categories within themselves further telling them apart and explaining them. Structured Query Language will also be covered and mildly ties into our cybersecurity lesson from last week and the week before. Another topic in this weeks lab that we will take a deeper look into is ethics concerning computers and networking. An interesting part of this lab will be the explanation of another computer organization and what they do in regards to computer ethics around the world. In short, this week we are going over new topics relating to charting programming, understanding data, cybersecurity, and morality. 

# Object Oriented Programming
* Create a class (using paper and pencil or using the Microsoft whiteboard app) for the following: a) Phone b) House c) Employee
* Identify the features (In the video for the Car class, we identified the properties as Year, Make Model etc)
* Identify the actions (In the video a) for the Car class, we identified the methods as Drive, Park, Start etc)
* Then upload a screenshot of your diagram to github for each of the above classes.

# Data, Information and Knowledge
## Relational Data
* What is the difference between data, information and knowledge?

Data are the bits of information that generally do not have a set context. Data can be quantitative- numeric, can be measurements or amounts- or qualitative- characteristic, can be features of descriptions. An example of quantitative data could be: 13 inches by 12 inches (there is no context) and an example of quantitative data could be: grey and fluffy.
Information is basically data but with context. For example, using our quantitative data example one could transform that into quantitative information by saying: The box to pack the headset is 13 inches by 12 inches. To convert out qualitative data example to qualitative information we could say: The little bunny was grey and fluffy. As you can see, information is applied data which makes it more in depth and specific. 
Knowledge defined simply is the grouping of bundles of information which makes one informed on a topic. Knowledge can help people in conversation, decision making, or even the scientific process. For example, knowledge regarding our quantitative/qualitative information could go as follows if we were given more: The box to pack the headset is 13 inches by 12 inches, the box is made out of blue cardboard with a grey fluffy bunny on the front, and has a detailed explanation of the headset on the back. With all of this information one is knowledgeable of the box that the headset will be packed in. 

data fragments --> specified --> information --> groups of information --> knowledge 

* If you were creating a database for a small company and two tables you identify are customers and orders explain the following: (be sure to use the example in the chapter as a guide - customers and orders would be like clubs and events) 
a) What would be the primary key in the customers and orders table?

In the customers table the primary key should be a customer ID. Giving a customer ID to each buyer will allow them to have a unique and personal numerical addresser that is linked to their account. Using an ID as a primary key is feasible because it will be a one-of-a-kind identifier and will not overlap with other's information. For example, using names as a primary key is not a good idea because 1. many names are frequent and can be the same and 2. names can be legally changed! An ID will be for the companies organizational use and will automatically be assigned to customers when they put in information for orders. In the orders table the primary key should be an order ID affiliated with the specific order a buyer is purchasing. Having the order ID as the primary key will allow the managers of the orders in different ways. For example, a manager can confirm that a product is associated with the correct ID. 

b) How would the customers and orders table be related?

The customers and orders table would be related because both would have the customer ID to connect the two's data/information, you could say the orders foreign key relates the tables. If one sees an order that has an issue all they would have to do is find the associated order ID on the orders table and then the customer ID which will be down the line. Vice versa, if one was wondering what specific orders one has purchased in the past or future all they would need to do it find the customer ID on the orders table (which may show up more than once) which will go across to the specific order itself. Customers purchase orders which are displayed on the orders table. 

c) What would be the foreign key in the orders table?

The foreign key in the orders table would be the customer ID from the customers table. The foreign key relates the primary key of the main table to the second table and in our case the customers table is the main table and the orders table is the secondary table. Very basically, the foreign key is the main relation between the tables (you can sort of see that explanation in the above question). If one is looking at the order table and wants to know the customer's info they can use the ID on their table to go to the customers table. If one is looking at the customers table and wants to know a customer's order they can use the customer ID to go to the orders table. 

d) The orders table would likely have a date field. Explain why it is important to properly define the data type of a field.

It would be important to define the data type of a field for two main reasons: storage space and functions. If you define a data field and allow it to have a maximum of characters over how many you actually need then regardless of using less than the max, every single time you have a data input in that field you will be storing the FULL amount of data bits pertaining, which add up. For example, a general date field is in mm/dd/yyyy format which is only 10 characters. If, per se, someone defined this data field to allow 25 characters then everytime a new date is added 25 bits are stored, which is an extreme waste of space since you only need 10. Defining the data type in relation to actual function is also an extremely important reason to do it properly. Data types tell what you are allowed to do with associated data. For example, the date field in the orders table should be defined as a date/time data field because this will allow the format to be interpreted correctly as a date or time, whilst if the date field was labeled as a object you would not even be able to type any format because the function of an object data field is to allow photo/file attachments. In our case (the orders table) the date field will be extremely important in proper shipping/organization and having the wrong data type can mess up the formatting and therefore not only the storage - making it less efficient - but also the character text itself.  

# Big Data
* Briefly describe the four "Vs" of big data

The four V's of data goes as follows: volume, variety, veracity, and velocity. 

Volume basically refers to the "big" aspect of big data and the fact that data is always growing and being stored, tons and TONS of data/bits/information are generated every year at an exponential rate. Volume explains how data is getting "big" and calls for the need for new complex data saving software in the technology field. 

Variety points to two main units of big data, which are structured and unstructured. Structured data is data with specific "rules" (per se). An example of this could be how dates have a certain formatting or how when dealing with money the text is always solely numerical. Structured data is the traditional data style and usually is made sense of easily. Unstructured data is data that does not follow a meta model (rules). Examples of unstructured data are voicemails, audio memos, or photos. Unsutructured data is a large idea in Big Data because it is what is strived to be understood since it does not fit as nicely as structured data.

Veracity refers to the fact that there may or may not be discreptancies in data, espcially when you are dealing with a enormous number of it. Veracity really bases off how trustworthy these big data packs are and the acknowledgment one has to make that not all of it will be 100% accurate. 

Velocity relating to data is the amount of data that is constantly coming in that has to be processed. Data is ALWAYS incoming, imagine how much gets stored in one day from credit cards, online applications, photos, etc. Velocity is the speed of data processing and since there are over 19 billion network connections in the world this is a growing topic and concept regarding big data. 

* What types of technology have driven the increased need for big data?

There are a number of technologies that have driven for the need of big data. As our chapter stated, many big grocery store chains (such as Walmart) process TONS of data from customer transactions throughout the day and are in need of the abilities of big data. To go further, banks also have experienced an incline in transactions and information which is causing them to also push for the need of big data. Even our government, local or federal, obtains bunches of information that can affect the lives of millions of people if not stored or treated correctly. Big data allows these businesses and industries to make valid decisions through analysis of data. As big data is more apparent so is the understanding of the data itself. step by step. 

# Structured Query Language (SQL)
* Explain RDBMS and how it relates to SQL and the purpose of SQL

RDBMS, or the "Relational Database Management System", is the foundation of base of SQL and other database systems. Very basically RDBMS is a type of program that lets a user create and administer a relational type database. This is where our "customer" and "orders" table example fits it, that is an RDBMS relational database table. SQL is the language used to actually access and maintain RDBMS. SQL (structured query language) is a type of programming language that connects/communicates stored data in a relational database. SQL is super easy to write and read which is why it is the ideal syntax for relational database systems, that is the purpose. 

* Pick two related tables from the diagram provided in the "module - SQL" and explain the relationship between them a) which is the primary key? b) which is the foreign key?

The two tables I decided to connect from the diagram are the "Orders" and "Shippers" diagram. Basically speaking, the orders table gives all information associated with an order and the shippers table gives all information about the company sending that order. The primary key of the orders table is the OrderID, which is unique to every order. The primary key of the shippers table is the ShipperID, which is unique to every company listed whom is associated with sending product. The foreign key in the orders table is the shipperID, since it is a sub to the orders table primary key and is the primary key for the shippers table. They are connected in a way so when you look at the orders table you are able to find more information about the specific shipping company which will be dealing with an order and vice versa if you are looking at a shipper and want to know which orders they are a part of all you need to do is look at their ID on the orders table. 

* Using W3Schools, try out a a) select statement a) where clause and upload screenshots of the results.

My SQL coding attemps have been uploaded :)

* Explain how SQL injections are a security threat and what can be done to reduce the issue.

An SQL injection is when someone injects code into a database to attack a specific application that runs off of that data. By doing this a hacker is able to get a response from the database and therefore they gain an understanding of the table construction and structure. This is an obvious security threat and is illegal under the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act. SQL injections also allow hackers to add and delete information. To prevent an SQL attack or reduce the issue one can to input validation and leave no single quotes (which can be manipulated). Also, putting up a firewall or scanning your database system for potential vulnerabilities also aids to reduce. 

# Ethical and Legal Implications of Information Systems
## Code of Ethics
* Explain the purpose of a "code of ethics" and why the ACM created a code for the computing discipline.

A code of ethics is sort of a written out policy sheet that tells us what actions are ethically acceptable within a group. Code of ethics documents are important because they explain to us what is appropriate and what is not, and by listening to these codes we make sure that everyone is comfortable and no bounds are overstepped. ACM created a code for the computing discipline because using computer technology with no policies would make it extremely easy to to manipulate and mess with not only people, but servers and databases. Many of the ACM policies are like the computing ethics rules we have learned before (privacy, security, etc). Having a code of ethics allows for members of a group to have clear guidelines for their authority. In ACM if one does not follow their code of ethics policies they are prone to termination from membership. 

* Explain the difference between a code of ethics and AUP (acceptable use policies.)

AUP is a policy outline that states what a person can and cannot do while on certain services. A big example of this would be checking a box that says "I agree and understand terms of service" before joining a public wifi session. AUP differs from a code of ethics because it is not as straightforward in policy. On top of that, when violating AUP the consequences are usually not as harsh as when violating a code of ethics. For example, if you are using a public wifi server and violate their AUP then you may just get kicked off or warned, while if you violated a code of ethics you may lose rights, get fired, or lose a membership. Acceptable use policies are usually more lowkey and simple than code of ethics policies, generally being around general rules such as "don't use another's account withoutout their agreement". 

* Pick a site of your choice and read the AUP. Select a policy of interest and report your findings (include a link to the site in your report.)

(11) I will not forward chain email or virus warnings. I will report chain email and Virus warnings to my IASO and delete the message. 
https://hr.ong.ohio.gov/Portals/0/technicians/training/AUP%20Acceptable%20Policy%2025-1%20PDF.pdf

This policy I found interesting because originally I did not think about the effect forwarding these kinds of emails around in a databse can have. For one, receiving and opening a chain or scam email can introduce viruses or spyware onto your laptop or computer software, forwarding and spreading these can cause an entire database to become infected with a virus/attack software. This policy basically states that one will not attempt to mess with or associate with scam emails or risk infecting their or other's computers. Reporting scam emails will keep the infection of viruses to a minimum. I understand how this is important. 

# Intellectual Property
* From the chapter follow the link to the WIPO. What is the purpose and importance of the WIPO?

WIPO is a global informational forum of the UN which includes are outputs policy information and IP services. WIPO focuses on safe innovation and creation around the world. This specialized agency wants to encourage innovation by allowing governments to adapt and structure copyrights and internet protocols so they can fit for everyone in todays everchanging field of technology. They want IP to be uniform and fair for all. WIPO also allows for a quick protection patent application. WIPO also provides mediation instead of costly court sessions over patent disagreements. 

* Using links in the chapter explain how a copyright is obtained and the benefit of registering for a copyright with the US Copyright Office. Explain why it might be important to copyright the svg image you created

A common misconception about copyright is that you HAVE to register to have it. In reality, once you create a creative work you are automatically protected by law to have it protected under copyright. This means you do NOT have to put a copyright notice on your original work, make personal copies, or actually apply to have it. Just because you are entitled automatically to a copyright doesn't mean your work is protected all around though. The benefits for truly registering are enormous. For example, by registering for a copyright you have the right to sue the person infringing your work, many people also notice a copyright claim and can therefore find you easier to license your work, you are also eligible to receive statuatory damages in court, and have evidence of validity of your work. There are many more upsides to truly getting registered, and since it is not that expensive ($55) if you have work you want to be protected it is mildly easy to receive a registrar. It would be important to copyright the svg image we created for a variety of reasons. For example, if I was to become a graphic designer and I wanted to showcase my logo art and skill in a folder I would want to copyright the work so others who create art strikingly similar to mine can be held accountable for proffiting off of my discretion. On top of that if I was very skillful and was looking to get hired I would want to be able to prove that that is my own work and validate it for employers looking to license.

* If the svg image you created became an item that identifies a source of goods or services, explain the role of a trademark in defining the intellectual property.

A trademark is a type of registration that protects the name of a brand and the logos on its services. A copyright protects the original artist and their work. The tradenark registration unlike the registration for a copyright would completely protect the brand itself. For example, when considering trademark applicants the USPTO takes into account how much it sounds, looks like, and color relates to other trademarks and logos for businesses around the United States. This ensures that your company is kept at one of a kind and does not overlap in confusion with others. Trademarks are not required by law for logos, but they are greatly reccomended for companies who do not want to risk getting sued or having to change their own logo. 

# Information Collection
* Explain how COPPA, FERPA and HIPPA restrict the collection of information on the Internet.

COPPA, FERPA, and HIPPA are all acts that are ased on information security. HIPPA is known very well in the medical field but it also reaches further into internet security on the basis of education. For example, HIPPA has policies which state the rights of what schools can do with student's personal information and also that parents are legally allowed access to all of their child's information that an educational facility holds. COPPA (Children's online Privacy Protection Act) is a federal law that does not allow the collection of data of those who are under 13 years old. As you have probably experienced once or twice, apps and websites make you put in your birthdate for this exact reason, they are following federal law. Of course many children do not put in their correct age and therefore this law is blindsided by that fact. FERPA, or the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act, prevents a teacher or school employee to disclose ANY personal information of a student to any person who is not that student's parents. All of these acts include in-person or virtual communication. COPPA, FERPA, and HIPPA go to protect children's rights to web privacy on internet servers across the globe. 

# Conclusion
* Include what you have learnt from this lab

Being our last true lab the topics we went over were really quite interesting to learn about. The creation of a data map and how they are used was very very intriguing and I thoroughly enjoyed creating them. The section on relational data, although sort of long, was one of my favorite parts of this lab. The difference between general data points, grouped data information, and grouped informational knowledge will stick truly stick with me throughout my journey in computer science. I never knew the relations of data to knowledge before, and while learning about those I also learned about the fourth quadrant after knowledge, which was wisdom. A very neat part of this lab was exploring relational database tables and the different aspects that connect how they work. I personally wish that SQL coding was a more in depth part of the lab, but I will take it upon myself to learn more about the syntax and applications on my own time. The ways of copyright and trademarking were something I had no knowledge on before I took a look at this lab. It was very interesing to be able to tell the difference between them and why they were important, I never knew copyright was something you automatically received when creating a work. The different policies on internet security were interesting as well, but since we have been going over ethics and computer morality for a quite a while it felt like a revisitation of new topics- if that makes sense. Overall I enjoyed learning different parts of IT in this lab and have a more in depth understanding about the policies and rules that one has to take into account when going on servers or online. 
